# COMP 3011 Assignment 1

JAHJA Darwin, 16094501d

---

## 1.

I have chosen Java 11 as my coding language to implement this algorithm.

To compile the java file, run: `javac LCS16094501D.java`

To execute the program, run: `java LCS16094501D nine singing ninjas`

To further test the program with larger input size (each input strings have a length of 512), simply copy the command from the `Inp16094501D.txt` file and execute in the command line. The result should be:

```
thmocxintgwsfhdygnihzglkenlomccvgqkdceagllngjmusnwsp
saajzyspofocotvxtfwrsaqofgscybbhtwcpdrirpvqlylyzxqi
```

## 2.

The Java program uses bottom-up dynamic programming to find out the LCS of 3 strings (represented as a string).

Based on the Theorem 15.1 from **Lecture 4 Slide 40**, we can extend this to obtain the following recurrence:

Define $c[i,j,k]$ = the length of an LCS of $X_i$, $Y_j$ and $Z_k$, Then:
$$
    c[i,j,k]= 
\begin{cases}
    0,&\text{if } i = 0 \text{ or } j = 0 \text{ or } k = 0\\
    c[i-1, j-1, k-1] + 1, &\text{if } i, j, k > 0 \text{ and } x_i = y_j = z_k\\
    max\{c[i-1, j, k], c[i, j-1, k], c[i, j, k-1]\}, &\text{otherwise}\\
\end{cases}
$$

The algorithm's procedures to obtain the LCS of 3 strings are similar to that to obtain from 2 strings. The difference is that the *count* table (*c-table*) and *trace* table (*b-table*) are defined in 3-Dimensional instead of 2-Dimensional, and their values are filled in based on this new recurrence.

Both time complexity and space complexity for this algorithm are $O(|X|\cdot|Y|\cdot|Z|)$. When running the Java program on my laptop (16GB RAM), the largest input length is around **940** before running out of my memory. In this case, running out of memory is the main issue that terminates the program.

## 3.

One example: Three binary sequences $X = \langle 1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1\rangle, Y = \langle 0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1\rangle, Z = \langle 1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0\rangle$

In this case, the LCS of $X, Y, Z$ is $\langle 1,1\rangle$, length = 2, while the LCS of W is $\langle 0,0,0,0,0,0\rangle$. Thus, the LCS of $X \text{ and }W$ is empty, length = 0, which is different from the length of LCS of $X, Y, Z$.

## 4.

| $n$ | $A(n)$ | $A(n)/n$ |
|-----|--------|----------|
| 20  | 12.9   | 0.645    |
| 50  | 33.8   | 0.6760   |
| 100 | 71.2   | 0.712    |
| 150 | 108.2  | 0.7213   |
| 200 | 145.1  | 0.7255   |
| 400 | 292.6  | 0.7315   |
| 600 | 443.8  | 0.7397   |
| 700 | 514.8  | 0.7354   |
| 800 | 590.9  | 0.7386   |
| 900 | 664.1  | 0.7379   |

(Note: The values of $A(n)/n$ have been rounded to 4 decimal places)

The value of $A(n)/n$ seems to converge to a constant between 0.71 to 0.74 for $n \geq 100$, according to my experiments.

## 5.

Assuming that when $c = \sqrt{2}$, there exists 2 sequences of size-$n$ so that there will be $\Omega(c^n)$ combinations of LCS. Then, let $f(n)$ be the combination of the 2 sequences of size-$n$, and denote $X_n$ and $Y_n$ as those 2 sequences.

Prove by induction: Assume that $f(n) \geq c^n/2 = 2^{n/2 - 1}$ holds, we define an alphabet set of $s = \{s_1,s_2,...,s_n\}$

Bases cases:

$n = 1$: Let $X_1 = Y_1 = \{s_1\}$. Thus, $F(n) = 1 = 2^0 > 2^{-0.5} = c^n/2$ holds.

$n = 2$: Let $X_2 = \{s_1, s_2\}, Y_2 = \{s_2, s_1\}$. Thus, $F(n) = 2 > 2^{-0.5} = c^n/2$ holds.

Induction: 

For $n > 2$, let $X_n = X_{n-2} + \{s_{n-1}, s_n\}, Y_n = Y_{n-2} + \{s_n,s_{n-1}\}$.

Thus, for each LCS of $(X_{n-2}, Y_{n-2})$, one can generate 2 distinct LCS of $(X_n,Y_n)$ by adding either $a_n$ or $a_{n-1}$ to the end of that LCS so that $f(n) = f(n-2) \cdot 2 \geq 2^{((n-2)/2)-1} \cdot 2= 2^{n/2-1} = c^n/2$ holds.

Finally, we can conclude that when $c=\sqrt{2}$, there exists 2 sequences of size-$n$ such that there are $\Omega(c^n)$ combination of LCS for $n \in\mathbb{Z^+}$.
