# COMP 3011 Assignment 3

JAHJA Darwin, 16094501d

---

## 1.

The probability of a classroom does not enter by a student is $1-1/n$.

For each classroom $i \in \{1,2,...,n\}$, we can define a indicator random variable, 
$$
X_i = I\{\text{classroom } i\text{ is empty after all } m \text{ students have gone to the classrooms}\}
$$
Therefore, 
$$
E[X_i] = Pr\{\text{classroom } i \text{ is empty after all } m \text{ students have gone to the classrooms}\} = (1-1/n)^m
$$

Then, let $X$ be the number of empty classrooms after all student $m$ has gone to the classroom. By linear of expectation, $E[\sum_{i=1}^{n} X_i]=\sum_{i=1}^{n} E[X_i]=\sum_{i=1}^{n} (1-1/n)^m = n(1-1/n)^m$.

## 2.

If $k = 4$ and the initial of the counter is 0, in this case, if we decrement the counter, it would do 4 flips and the counter will turn from 0000 to 1111. Then, if we increment the counter, it would do another 4 flips and turn from 1111 to 0000. By performing such sequences of increment and decrement for $n/2$ times ($n/2$ increments + $n/2$ decrements), the total amortized cost will be 4n.

Similarly, for $k$-bits binary counter starting from 0, a decrement costs $k$ flips, following up by a increment also costs $k$ flips. Therefore, when performing such sequences of increment and decrement, the amortized cost per operation could be $\Theta(k)$.

## 3.

(a) $l$ is the left boundary of the Z-box. The idea is to maintain an interval $[l, r]$ with max $r$ so that $[l,r]$ is the prefix substring (substring which is also prefix).

(b) Pseudocode of Algorithm

**Input:** A string $R$ and a string $S$.

**Output:** The longest suffix of $S$ which is equal to a prefix of $R$.

```c
let string T = R + "$" + S
lenT = length of string T
Z = array of length lenT, with all elements initialized as 0
left = 0, right = 0

for k = 1 to lenT:
    if k > right do
        lt = rt = k
        while rt < lenT and T[right] == T[right-left]:
            right = right + 1
        Z[k] = right - left
        right = right - 1

    else
        // Operation inside the box
        k1 = k - left

        // if the value does not stretched till right bound then just copy it
        if Z[k1] < right-k+1 do
            Z[k] = Z[k1]

        else
            // Otherwise try to see if there are more matches
            left = k
            while right < lenT and T[right] == T[right-left] do
                right = right + 1
            Z[k] = right - left
            right = right - 1

    // Check whether it is a suffix
    if k + Z[k] == lenT:
        return R[0:Z[k]], which is the prefix of R equal to longest suffix of S

return NULL, at which there is no suffix of S equal to prefix of R
```

The time complexity of the above algorithm using Z-Box algorithm is $O(|R|+|S|)$, where $|R|$ and $|S|$ are the lengths of string $R$ and $S$ respectively.

## 4.

Let $\langle p_1,p_2,...,p_n \rangle$ be the points in $P$ sorted in order of ascending $x$-coordinates then ascending of $y$-coordinates.

Then, we need to create a list $R$ containing all possible combinations for a pair of points. We can do this by looping each point linearly and combine them with other points (i.e. $R${$(p_1,p_2),(p_1,p_3),...,(p_1,p_n),$$(p_2,p_3),...,(p_{n-1},p_n)$}) so that the pairs of points in $R$ are still in ascending order.

After that, for each pair of points $(p_a,p_c)$ in $R$, we consider them as 2 diagonally opposite points of a square to calculate the other two points, $p_b$ and $p_d$ where $x_{pb}<x_{pd}$ or $y_{pb}<y_{pd}$ if $x_{pb}=x_{pd}$, and store them in a pair $(p_b,p_d)$. At this stage, we can do binary search in $R$ to check whether $(p_b,p_d)$ exists in $R$. If it exists, then put the result in a list $S$ as a set {$p_a,p_b,p_c,p_d$} if this set does not exist in $S$. Otherwise, continue the loop.

Finally, output $S$ which contains all sets of points that can form a square. Based on the above method, the problem can be solved in $O(|P|^{2}\cdot log|P|)$.

Steps:

1. Sort the points in P in order of ascending $x$-coordinates then ascending of $y$-coordinates.
2. Let $R=${$(p_1,p_2),(p_1,p_3),...,(p_1,p_n),$$(p_2,p_3),...,(p_{n-1},p_n)$}, storing all possible combination of pair of points.
3. For each pair of points in $R$, take them as 2 diagonally opposite points $(p_a,p_c)$ of a square to calculate $(p_b,p_d)$.
    ```tex
    centerX = (Xa+Xc)/2; centerY = (Ya+Yc)/2; // Center point
    halfX   = (Xa-Xc)/2; halfY   = (Ya-Yc)/2; // Half-diagonal

    Xb = centerX-halfY; Yb = centerY+halfX; // Pb
    Xd = centerX+halfY; Yd = centerY-halfX; // Pd
    ```
    Then, perform binary search in $R$ to find $(p_b,p_d)$. If found, put {$p_a,p_b,p_c,p_d$} in a list $S$ if not in $S$. Otherwise, continue the loop.
4. Output $S$.

To analyze the running time, sorting takes $O(nlogn)$ time. Step 2 takes $O(n^2)$ time while Step 3 takes $O(n^{2}logn)$ Other operations take $O(1)$ time.

Therefore, by summing up the cost of every line, the time complexity of this algorithm is $O(n^{2}logn)$, where $n=|P|$.